docs: using vmauth with VictoriaLogs (#524)
VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaLogs: docs/victorialogs/security-and-lb.md

For configuration examples using Bearer token, Basic auth, and mTLS see [these docs](http://localhost:1313/victoriametrics/vmauth/#authorization).

### Cluster routing

vmauth allows selecting different clusters depending on the request path. For example:

```yaml
unauthorized_user:
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/cold/select/.*"]
        url_prefix: http://victoria-logs-cold:9428
        # drop /cold/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 1

      - src_paths: ["/hot/select/.*"]
        url_prefix: http://victoria-logs-hot:9428
        # drop /hot/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 1
```

The configuration above enables redirecting all requests that start with the path prefix `/cold/` to the cluster located at `http://victoria-logs-cold:9428`,
and requests with the path prefix `/hot/` to the cluster located at `http://victoria-logs-hot:9428`.

This approach is useful when applying different retention policies for various types of logs.

> For example, you might store warn-level and higher severity logs in the cold cluster with longer retention,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you might store warn-level and higher severity logs in the cold instance / cluster with longer retention,
```

> while keeping debug-level and higher severity logs only in the hot cluster with shorter retention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while keeping debug-level and higher severity logs only in the hot instance / cluster with shorter retention.
```

The `drop_src_path_prefix_parts` parameter is used to remove the prefix from the path when proxying the request to VictoriaLogs.
For example, if vmauth receives a request to `/cold/select/logsql/query`,
VictoriaLogs will receive the path without the `/cold/` prefix, allowing it to properly handle the search query.

### Tenant resolution

> To properly separate and access data across tenants, two headers must be set when writing logs: `AccountID` and `ProjectID`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To properly separate and access data across tenants, two headers must be set when writing logs: `AccountID` and `ProjectID` according to [these docs](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/#multitenancy).
```

For example, the following configuration allows user `my-account-admin` to have access to all `ProjectID`s, but only for one `AccountID`:

```yaml
users:
  - username: my-account-admin
    password: foobar
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/my-account/select/.*"]
        url_prefix: "http://victoria-logs:9428"
        headers:
          - "AccountID: 1"
        # drop /my-account/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 1
```

To allow unauthenticated access to a specific tenant, define the `unauthorized_user` as shown below:

```yaml
unauthorized_user:
  url_map:
    - src_paths: ["/my-account/frontend-logs/.*"]
      url_prefix: "http://victoria-logs:9428"
      headers:
        - "AccountID: 1"
        - "ProjectID: 7"
      # drop /my-account/frontend-logs/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
      drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 2
```

This will grant all users access to logs for the specified tenant without additional authentication.

Note that if you don't specify the `AccountID` or `ProjectID` header,
VictoriaLogs will assume that the corresponding header has a value of 0.

> ### In-Tenant access control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Access control inside a single tenant
```

> `VictoriaLogs` provides the ability to add extra filters to each request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`VictoriaLogs` can apply extra filters per each request to select APIs according to [these docs](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/querying/#extra-filters).
```

> This is useful when you need to give access to a subset of data within a tenant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful when you need to give access to a subset of data within a single tenant.
```

If you want to hide a subset of data within a tenant, use the HTTP query parameter `extra_filters`:

```yaml
users:
  - username: foo
    password: bar
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/select/.*"]
        url_prefix:
        - http://victoria-logs-1:9428?extra_filters=password:''
        - http://victoria-logs-2:9428?extra_filters=password:''
```

With this configuration, vmauth will add the [empty filter](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/logsql/#empty-value-filter)
`password:''` to each request, which means that the `password` field must be empty or missing in the log.
This is useful in cases when sensitive information has leaked and needs to be hidden.

> To restrict log visibility within a specific stream, use the `extra_stream` query parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To restrict log visibility within a specific [log stream](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/keyconcepts/#stream-fields), use the `extra_stream_filters` query parameter.
```

The configuration below adds an additional [stream filter](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/logsql/#stream-filter)
to each request based on the request path, and routes `/audit-logs` to a separate VictoriaLogs cluster:

```yaml
users:
  - username: frontend-logs-viewer
    password: secret
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/frontend-logs/select/.*"]
        url_prefix: http://victoria-logs:9428?extra_stream_filters=_stream%3A%7Bservice%3Dfrontend-logs%7D
        # drop /frontend-logs/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 1

  - username: mobile-logs-viewer
    password: secret
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/mobile-logs/select/.*"]

>         url_prefix: http://victoria-logs:9428?extra_stream_filters=_stream%3A%7Bservice%3Dfrontend-logs%7D

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        url_prefix: http://victoria-logs:9428?extra_stream_filters=_stream%3A%7Bservice%3Dmobile-logs%7D
```

        # drop /mobile-logs/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 1

  - username: audit-logs-viewer
    password: secret
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/audit-logs/select/.*"]
        url_prefix: http://victoria-logs-audit:9428
        # drop /audit-logs/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 1
```

`extra_filters` and `extra_stream_filters` must be encoded using [percent encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percent-encoding).
For example, the query `_stream:{service=frontend-logs}` should be written as `_stream%3A%7Bservice%3Dfrontend-logs%7D`.

Prefer using `extra_stream_filters` over `extra_filters` whenever possible.
This can improve search query performance because VictoriaLogs
processes searches using stream filters faster than regular filters.

## Write Authorization

> For log writing, [VictoriaLogs single-node](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/#high-availability-ha-setup-with-victorialogs-single-node-instances)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For log writing, [VictoriaLogs single-node](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/)
```

> and [vlinsert](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/cluster/) use the same write API and use HTTP endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [vlinsert](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/cluster/) expose the same write API endpoints
```

starting with `/insert/`, so when configuring write requests, it is important to set this path for request authorization.

Example vmauth configuration that allows insert requests

> with Basic auth authentication and distributes load between `vlinsert`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with Basic auth authentication and distributes load between `vlinsert` nodes in the cluster:
```

```yaml
users:
  - username: foo
    password: bar
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/insert/.*"]
        url_prefix:
        - "http://vlinsert-1:9428"
        - "http://vlinsert-2:9428"
        - "http://vlinsert-3:9428"
```

> Note that vmauth does not allow writing data to multiple clusters, instead, it handles load balancing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that vmauth cannot replicate data to multiple destinations - it spreads incoming requests among the configured backends.
```

> To replicate data to multiple clusters, use [vlagent](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/vlagent/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [vlagent](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/vlagent/) for replicating the data to multiple VictoriaLogs instances or multiple VictoriaLogs clusters.
```

If you trust the writing side, for example when collecting logs within your own cluster, you can set
the [query parameters](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/data-ingestion/#http-query-string-parameters)

> and [tenant headers](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/#multitenancy) directly at the write level without an extra proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [tenant headers](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/#multitenancy) directly at the log shipper side without an extra proxy.
```

> In such cases, it's usually sufficient to restrict network access so only trusted agents can write to vlinsert or VictoriaLogs single-node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such cases, it's usually sufficient to restrict network access so only trusted agents can write to VictoriaLogs.
```

On the other hand, if you do not trust the writing side, for example, if the logs come from frontend or mobile apps,
it is very important to secure the write API:

> - Set up a secure HTTPS connection for [vmauth](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/vmauth/#tls-termination-proxy) and [VictoriaLogs](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/cluster/#security).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set up a secure HTTPS connection for vmauth (see [these docs](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/vmauth/#tls-termination-proxy)) and VictoriaLogs (see [these docs](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/cluster/#security)).
```

> - Place a load balancer before vmauth that can detect bots and DDoS attacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Protect vmauth with anti-DDoS services if needed.
```

- Consider the [max_concurrent_requests](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/vmauth/#concurrency-limiting) parameter to control the number of concurrent write requests.
- Add [monitoring and alerting for vmauth](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/vmauth/#monitoring) to control the load.

> - Write logs from untrusted applications to separate clusters so that the unpredictable write load does not affect other clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Write logs from untrusted applications to dedicated VictoriaLogs instances or clusters so that the unpredictable write load does not affect other instances.
```

> Also note that for vlinsert, you need to set the flag `-select.disable=true` to disable the search API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended setting the `-select.disable` command-line flag at `vlinsert` in order to disable search API.
```

> This will secure data in case an attacker has direct network access to `vlinsert` outside of vmauth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will secure access to the stored logs in case an attacker has direct network access to `vlinsert`.
```

For configuration examples using Bearer token, Basic auth, and mTLS see [these docs](http://localhost:1313/victoriametrics/vmauth/#authorization).

### Tenant assignment

vmauth allows redirecting requests to different tenants based on the request path.
Example vmauth configuration that allows insert requests

> with Basic auth authentication and distributes load between `vlinsert` for three different tenants:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with Basic auth authentication and distributes load between the configured `vlinsert` nodes for three different [tenants](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/#multitenancy):
```

        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 2
    max_concurrent_requests: 10
  - username: frontend
    password: secret
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/my-account/frontend-logs/insert/.*"]
        url_prefix:
        - "http://vlinsert-1:9428"
        - "http://vlinsert-2:9428"
        headers:
          - "AccountID: 1"
          - "ProjectID: 7"
        # drop /my-account/frontend-logs/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 2
    max_concurrent_requests: 10
```

Below is a diagram of this architecture for the clustered version of VictoriaLogs:

```mermaid
flowchart BT
    subgraph Remote2["VictoriaLogs cluster"]
        direction BT
        vlinsert-az1["vlinsert"]
        vlinsert-az1 --> vlstorage2-1["vlstorage 1"]
        vlinsert-az1 --> vlstorage2-2["vlstorage 2"]
    end

    vector -->|Basic auth<br> /my-account/k8s-logs| vmauth
    vlagent -->|Bearer auth<br>/my-account/mobile-logs| vmauth
    filebeat -->|mTLS<br>/my-account/frontend-logs| vmauth

    vmauth -->|AccountID: X<br>ProjectID:Y| vlinsert-az1
```

### Adding extra fields

> You can use the `extra_fields` parameter in vmauth to automatically add fields to incoming log entries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `extra_fields` parameter in vmauth to automatically add fields to incoming log entries according to [these docs](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/data-ingestion/#http-parameters).
```

> This is helpful when the writing side cannot include certain metadata, such as the service name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is helpful when the writing side cannot include certain metadata, such as the source service name.
```

> The example below adds a `service` field with the value `frontend-logs` to all logs received at the `/frontend-logs/insert/*` path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below adds a `service` field with the value `frontend-logs` to all the logs received at the `/frontend-logs/insert/*` path.
```

It also includes the `_stream_fields` parameter as an example of how to configure [stream](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/keyconcepts/#stream-fields) for such logs.

```yaml
users:
    bearer_token: foobar
    url_map:
      - src_paths: ["/frontend-logs/insert/.*"]
        url_prefix:
        - "http://vlinsert-1:9428?extra_fields=service=frontend-logs&_stream_fields=service"
        - "http://vlinsert-2:9428?extra_fields=service=frontend-logs&_stream_fields=service"
        - "http://vlinsert-3:9428?extra_fields=service=frontend-logs&_stream_fields=service"
        # drop /frontend-logs/ path prefix from the original request before proxying it to url_prefix.
        drop_src_path_prefix_parts: 1
    max_concurrent_requests: 10
```

> Any field sent by the application will be overridden by the value set in `extra_fields`, if defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any field sent by the application will be overridden by the value set in the `extra_fields`, if defined.
This protects from unexpected overriding of the provided `extra_fields` by the log shipper.
```
